12/4 notes



A data structure is defined as a particular way of storing and organizing data in our devices to use the data efficiently and effectively. The main idea behind using data structures is to minimize the time and space complexities. An efficient data structure takes minimum memory space and requires minimum time to execute the data.



Time Complexity: Time complexity is used to measure the amount of time required to execute the code.
Space Complexity: Space complexity means the amount of space required to execute successfully the functionalities of the code.
You will also come across the term Auxiliary Space very commonly in DSA, which refers to the extra space used in the program other than the input data structure.


The time required for executing a code depends on several factors, such as:



The number of operations performed in the program,
The speed of the device, and also
The speed of data transfer is being executed on an online platform.


An array is a collection of items of the same variable type stored that are stored at contiguous memory locations. It’s one of the most popular and simple data structures and is often used to implement other data structures. Each item in an array is indexed starting with 0.

Declaration of an Array: There are basically two ways to declare an array.

Syntax:



let arrayName = [value1, value2, ...]; // Method 1

let arrayName = new Array(); // Method 2



Types of Array operations:

Traversal: Traverse through the elements of an array.
Insertion: Inserting a new element in an array.
Deletion: Deleting element from the array.
Searching:  Search for an element in the array.
Sorting: Maintaining the order of elements in the array.


JavaScript strings are used for storing and manipulating text. It can contain zero or more characters within quotes.

Creating Strings: There are two ways to create a string in Javascript:

By string literal
By string object


2. String in javascript

JavaScript strings are used for storing and manipulating text. It can contain zero or more characters within quotes.

Creating Strings: There are two ways to create a string in Javascript:

By string literal
By string object


String operations:

Substrings:  A substring is a contiguous sequence of characters within a string
Concatenation: This operation is used for appending one string to the end of another string.
Length: It defines the number of characters in the given string.
Text Processing Operations: Text processing is the process of creating and editing strings.
Insertion: This operation is used to insert characters in the string at the specified position.
Deletion: This operation is used to delete characters in the string at the specified position.
Update: This operation is used to update characters in the string at the specified position.


3.  Linked List in Javascript

A linked list is a linear data structure, Unlike arrays, linked list elements are not stored at a contiguous location. it is basically chains of nodes, each node contains information such as data and a pointer to the next node in the chain. In the linked list there is a head pointer, which points to the first element of the linked list, and if the list is empty then it simply points to null or nothing.



Linked List Data Structure

Operations on Linked List:



Traversal: We can traverse the entire linked list starting from the head node. If there are n nodes then the time complexity for traversal becomes O(n) as we hop through each and every node.
Insertion: Insert a key to the linked list. An insertion can be done in 3 different ways; insert at the beginning of the list, insert at the end of the list and insert in the middle of the list.
Deletion: Removes an element x from a given linked list. You cannot delete a node by a single step. A deletion can be done in 3 different ways; delete from the beginning of the list, delete from the end of the list and delete from the middle of the list.
Search: Find the first element with the key k in the given linked list by a simple linear search and returns a pointer to this element


4. Stack in Javascript

Stack is a linear data structure in which insertion and deletion are done at one end this end is generally called the top. It works on the principle of Last In First Out (LIFO) or First in Last out (FILO). LIFO means the last element inserted inside the stack is removed first. FILO means, the last inserted element is available first and is the first one to be deleted.



Stack Data structure

Operations in a Stack:

Push: Add an element to the top of a stack
Pop: Remove an element from the top of a stack
IsEmpty: Check if the stack is empty
IsFull: Check if the stack is full
top/Peek: Get the value of the top element without removing it
Below is the implementation of the Stack  in javascript:



 5. Queue in Javascript

A Queue is a linear structure that follows a particular order in which the operations are performed. The order is First In First Out (FIFO). It is similar to the ticket queue outside a cinema hall, where the first person entering the queue is the first person who gets the ticket.



Queue Data Structure

Operations of Queue:

A queue is an object (an abstract data structure – ADT) that allows the following operations:

Enqueue: Add an element to the end of the queue
Dequeue: Remove an element from the front of the queue
IsEmpty: Check if the queue is empty
IsFull: Check if the queue is full
top/Peek: Get the value of the front of the queue without removing it
