12/6 notes

Application of Arrays:

Arrays are the simplest data structures that store items of the same data type. A basic application of Arrays can be storing data in tabular format. For example, if we wish to store the contacts on our phone, then the software will simply place all our contacts in an array.

Some other applications of the arrays are:

Arrangement of the leader board of a game can be done simply through arrays to store the score and arrange them in descending order to clearly make out the rank of each player in the game.
A simple question Paper is an array of numbered questions with each of them assigned some marks.
2D arrays, commonly known as, matrices, are used in image processing.
It is also used in speech processing, in which each speech signal is an array.
Your viewing screen is also a multidimensional array of pixels.
Book titles in a Library Management Systems.
Online ticket booking.
Contacts on a cell phone.
 For CPU scheduling in computer.
To store the possible moves of chess on a chessboard.
To store images of a specific size on an android or laptop.

Application of Strings:

Spam email detection.
Plagiarism detection.
Search engine.
Digital forensic and information retrieval system
Spell checkers.
In the database to check valid information of the user


Application of Matrix:

Matrix is an ordered collection of columns and rows of elements. It is necessary to enclose the elements of a matrix within the brackets.



Some applications of a matrix are:

In geology, matrices are used for making seismic surveys.
Used for plotting graphs, and statistics and also to do scientific studies and research in almost different fields.
Matrices are also used in representing real-world data like the population of people, infant mortality rate, etc.
They are the best representation methods for plotting surveys.
 For refraction and reflection in science optics.
Electronic circuit and quantum physics.
Media player.
Mailing list.
Symbol table creation.

Application of Linked Lists:

A linked list is a sequence data structure, which connects elements, called nodes, through links.

Some other applications of the linked list are:

Images are linked with each other. So, an image viewer software uses a linked list to view the previous and the next images using the previous and next buttons.
Web pages can be accessed using the previous and the next URL links which are linked using a linked list.
The music players also use the same technique to switch between music.
To keep the track of turns in a multi-player game, a circular linked list is used.
MS-Paint drawings and shapes are connected via a linked list on canvas.
Social media content “feeds”.
Used for symbol table management in a designing compiler
Used in switching between applications and programs (Alt + Tab) in the Operating system (implemented using Circular Linked List)
Train coaches are connected to one another in a doubly-linked list fashion.
It can be used to implement Stacks, Queues, Graphs, and Trees.
To perform undo operation.
Back button.[LIFO]
Syntax in the coding editor.
History of visited pages.
Application of Stack:

A stack is a data structure that uses LIFO order.

Some Applications of a stack are:

Converting infix to postfix expressions.
Undo/Redo button/operation in word processors.
Syntaxes in languages are parsed using stacks.
It is used in many virtual machines like JVM.
Forward-backward surfing in the browser.
History of visited websites.
Message logs and all messages you get are arranged in a stack.
Call logs, E-mails, Google photos’ any gallery, YouTube downloads, Notifications ( latest appears first ).
Scratch card’s earned after Google pay transaction.
Wearing/Removing Bangles, Pile of Dinner Plates, Stacked chairs.
Changing wearables on a cold evening, first in, comes out at last.
Last Hired, First Fired - which is typically utilized when a company reduces its workforce in an economic recession.
Loading bullets into the magazine of a gun. The last one to go in is fired first. Bam!
Java Virtual Machine.
Recursion.
Used in IDEs to check for proper parentheses matching
Media playlist. T o play previous and next song
