12/7 notes



Application of Queue:

A queue is a data structure that uses FIFO order.



Some applications of a queue are:

Operating System uses queues for job scheduling.
To handle congestion in the networking queue can be used.
Data packets in communication are arranged in queue format.
Sending an e-mail, it will be queued.
Server while responding to request
Uploading and downloading photos, first kept for uploading/downloading will be completed first (Not if there is threading)
Most internet requests and processes use queue.
While switching multiple applications, windows use circular queue.
In Escalators, Printer spooler, Car washes queue.
A circular queue is used to maintain the playing sequence of multiple players in a game.
A queue can be implemented in - Linked List-based Queue, Array-based Queue, Stack-based Queue.
Uploading and downloading photos, first kept for uploading/downloading will be completed first (Not if there is threading).
 Handle website traffic
CPU scheduling
Application of Priority Queue:

Process scheduling in the kernel.
Priority queues are used in file-downloading operations in a browser
 Vehicle at the toll center.
Application of Graph:

Graph is a data structure where data is stored in a collection of interconnected vertices (nodes) and edges (paths).

Some applications of a graph are:

Facebook’s Graph API uses the structure of Graphs.
Google’s Knowledge Graph also has to do something with Graph.
Dijkstra algorithm or the shortest path first algorithm also uses graph structure to find the smallest path between the nodes of the graph.
The GPS navigation system also uses shortest path APIs.
Networking components have a huge application for graph
Facebook, Instagram, and all social media networking sites every user is Node
Data organization
React’s virtual DOM uses graph data structures.
MS Excel uses DAG (Directed Acyclic Graphs).
Path Optimization Algorithms, BFS, DFS.
Recommendation Engines.
Scientific Computations, Flight Networks, Page ranking.
 Google map to find nearest location.
Facebook to suggest mutual friends
Application of Tree:

Trees are hierarchical structures having a single root node.

Some applications of the trees are:

XML Parser uses tree algorithms.
The decision-based algorithm is used in machine learning which works upon the algorithm of the tree.
Databases also use tree data structures for indexing.
Domain Name Server(DNS) also uses tree structures.
File explorer/my computer of mobile/any computer
BST used in computer Graphics
Posting questions on websites like Quora, the comments are a child of questions.
Parsers(XML parser).
Code Compression(zip).
DOM in Html.
Evaluate an expression (i.e., parse).
Integral to compilers/automata theory.
To store the possible moves in a chess game.
To store the genealogy information of biological species.
Used by JVM (Java Virtual Machine) to store Java objects.
Application of Binary Search Tree:

D Game Engine.
Computer Graphics Rendering.
Routing table.


Application of Hash Tables:

Hash Tables are store data in key-value pairs. It only stores data that has a key associated with it. Inserting and Searching operations are easily manageable while using Hash Tables.

Some applications of a hashtable are:

Data stored in databases is generally of the key-value format which is done through hash tables.
Every time we type something to be searched in google chrome or other browsers, it generates the desired output based on the principle of hashing.
Message Digest, a function of cryptography also uses hashing for creating output in such a manner that reaching the original input from that generated output is almost next to impossible.
In our computers we have various files stored in it, each file has two very crucial pieces of information that is, the filename and file path, in order to make a connection between the filename to its corresponding file path hash tables are used.
Social network “feeds”.
Password hashing.
Used for fast data lookup - symbol table for compilers, database indexing, caches, Unique data representation.
To store a set of fixed keywords that are referenced very frequently.
Application of Heap:

A Heap is a special case of a binary tree where the parent nodes are compared to their children with their values and are arranged accordingly.

Some applications of heaps are:

In heapsort Algorithm, is an algorithm for sorting elements in either min heap(the key of the parent is less than or equal to those of its children) or max heap(the key of the parent is greater than or equal to those of its children), sorting is done with the creation of heaps.
Heaps are used to implementing a priority queue where priority is based on the order of heap created.
Systems concerned with security and embedded system such as Linux Kernel uses Heap Sort because of the O( n log(n) ).
If we are stuck in finding the Kthsmallest (or largest) value of a number then heaps can solve the problem in an easy and fast manner.
Used by JVM (Java Virtual Machine) to store Java objects.
Application of Algorithms:

Algorithms are well-defined sets of instructions designed that are used to solve problems or perform a task. To explain in simpler terms, it is a set of operations performed in a step-by-step manner to execute a task. The real-life applications of algorithms are discussed below.

Application of Sorting Algorithms

Order things by their value.
Backend Databases (Merge Sort).
Playing Cards with your friends (Insertion Sort).
sort() - uses IntroSort (a hybrid of Quicksort, Heapsort, and Insertion Sort), Faster than qsort()
The contact list on the phone
Online shopping. To sort prize in different range . example : flipkart and amazon.
Application of Greedy Algorithms:

Dijkstra algorithm.
Shopping on a tight budget but want to buy gifts for all family members.
Prim’s and Kruskal’s algorithms are used for finding the minimum spanning trees.
Application of Dijkstra Algorithm

Used in applications like Google Maps to find the shortest path in a graph.
Application of PRIM’S and KRUSKAL’S Algorithm

Used for finding the minimum spanning trees.
Application of Dynamic Programming Algorithms:

In Google Maps to find the shortest path between the source and the series of destinations (one by one) out of the various available paths.
In networking to transfer data from a sender to various receivers in a sequential manner.
Application of Backtracking Algorithms:

Suppose we are coding a chess-playing algorithm and at a certain point, the algorithm finds that a set of steps fails to win. In this situation, the algorithm will reverse back to the safe state and try another possible set of steps.
Sudoku solver
2048 game
 Computer networking.
To solve problem of the N Queen.
To solve the problem of the Maze.
To find the Hamiltonian Path present in a graph.
To the love problem of Knight’s Tour Problem.
